---
title: Dropping the U-Word
description: "Even though talking about “users” is a sort of tech dogma, the term carries some unpleasant assumptions."
permalink: /blog/u-word
tags: ux-writing 
---
The word *user* is an easy way to refer to *User Experience* in general terms, but it’s flawed as the default word for people that use products.

The word *user* carries a set of assumptions and hides the actual people you are designing for behind a vague and meaningless bit of jargon. Users aren’t in control of what they’re using, they’re lemmings to their product. 

This is an apt description of a Facebook, Google or drug user: a person without agency trapped in some [dystopian Nir Eyal product](https://www.nirandfar.com/hooked/). These companies get the buzz, but my hunch is that the majority of us in the UX industry don’t build these sorts of products. 

I do UX writing for software that helps business owners manage their online presence, accept payments and provide services. These people aren’t users&thinsp;—&thinsp;they’re merchants, business owner, entrepreneurs or in a word: customers. The word customer evokes an obligation from me. They’re paying money so that I provide the best possible product to help them run their businesses. 

There is no obligation to a user. Keep them “engaged”, run [ethically dubious tests](https://techcrunch.com/2014/06/29/facebook-and-the-ethics-of-user-manipulation/) and *monetize* them. A user has no recourse, no customer support they can reach out to. 

As a writer, I know that changing the words I use creates a subtle shift in perception. That’s why I’ve mostly stopped using the word user. In most cases there’s a more specific noun that easily takes it place: customers, clients, merchants, bloggers, readers, accountants, etc. It’s easier to relate to a reader rather than a user. 

This isn’t about becoming the PC police. There’s nothing wrong with the word *user* in the right context. If you have a product that completely different groups of people use, user is the obvious way to shorten “people who use this product”.

I approach this as a thought experiment. Try not referring to your customers as *users* for a week or two. Do you notice that you relate to the people you build products for differently? I did.
